we start with breaking news from the
international criminal court concerning
the Israeli Hamas conflict the ICC
prosecutor says there are reasonable
grounds to believe that Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu Bears
responsibility Bears criminal
responsibility for war crimes and crimes
against humanity the prosecutor
therefore says he's seeking an arrest
warrant for Mr Netanyahu has also
applied for arrest warrants for three
Hamas leaders Hamas carried out the
October 7 attacks in Israel and is
designated a terrorist organization by
many
countries here is the icc's chief
prosecutor talking about those arrest
warrants that I have reasonable grounds
to believe on the basis of evidence
collected and examined by my office that
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and minister of defense yuav
galand bear criminal
responsibility for the following
International crimes committed on the
territory of the State of Palestine from
at least the 8th of October
2023 the crimes include starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare
willfully causing great suffering
Serious injury to body or health or
cruel
treatment willful killing or murder
and intentionally directing attacks
against a civilian
population as well as crimes against
humanity of extermination and or murder
persecution and allegations of crimes of
committing other inhumane
acts it's alleged that these crimes were
committed in the context of the ongoing
armed conflict and as part of a
widespread and systematic attack against
the civilian population of Gaza pursuant
to a state
policy my office submits that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that these
three Hamas leaders are criminally
responsible for the killing of Israeli
civilians in attacks perpetrated by
Hamas and other armed groups on the 7th
of October
2023 The Taking of hostages and the
other crimes alleged in our applications
my office has diligently collected
evidence and interviewed survivors and
eyewitnesses at the scene of at least
six major attack
locations the applications rely upon
evidence such as CCTV
footage authenticated audio photographs
and video material expert evidence and
statements by Hamas and the members of
other armed groups including by the
alleged perpetrators themselves so
that's the icc's uh Chief prosecutor
Karim Khan speaking a little earlier
let's go to uh Jerusalem now where
Rebecca RS our correspondent there is
following this story welcome Rebecca um
what reaction if any uh from
Israel well there hasn't been any yet
from the two men involved Benjamin
Netanyahu and uh the defense minister
yav Galant we have heard from uh the
opposition leader y Leed who's called
the decision a design master and we just
recently heard from Benny gance also a
member of the war cabinet but not in
Benjamin netanyahu's party he slammed uh
the decision as a crime of historic
proportions now that uh is echoing words
that we heard from Benjamin Netanyahu
himself last month when it was announced
that the ICC may be pursuing uh this
angle uh he said in response if the ICC
sought arrest warrants it would be a
scandal of historic proportions he
called it um what would be an anti atic
hate crime so you can probably gauge
what the response is going to be and
that is certainly the response we're
hearing kind of across the board from
people in Israel an unnamed Israeli
diplomatic official told the media here
that the ICC decision is hypocritical
and embarrassing on the international
stage I think that's pretty much what we
can expect across the board here Phil so
what potential consequences could this
announcement have for the Israeli
government and and more broadly for Mr
Netanyahu
well that's difficult to say we know
that Israel isn't signed up to the IC it
doesn't recognize it and is therefore
not under its uh jurisdiction neither is
its staunch Ally the United States uh
we've seen in the past Vladimir Putin
has has been issued an arrest warrant
and He Still Remains uh you know in
power in Russia so there may be little
consequences in the immediate but
personally for Benjamin Netanyahu will
restrict him traveling I mentioned that
Israel and the United States are not
signed up to the ICC but 125 other
countries are and should the yo of
Galant or Benjamin Netanyahu step foot
in one of those countries they are
obligated to uh to you know to arrest to
arrest the to arrest them and and send
them to the hag effectively so you know
it certainly will um
have ramifications there personally when
you look on the The Wider scale and the
effects on the war it certainly may
cause the US to put more pressure on
Israel it may when faced with this
International pressure maybe fac to put
even more pressure on Israel when it
comes to humanitarian Aid and the way
that it's conducting the war in Gaza but
in terms of political ramifications in
the immediacy uh well that remains to be
seen but I certainly don't think it's
going to have any major effects on
whether or not Benjamin Netanyahu
remains prime minister so if this
request from the prosecutor comes to
anything of Rebecca um might it actually
boost Mr netanyahu's standing there in
Jerusalem uh
politically well it's true and it should
be stated Phil that of course an a panel
of IC judges still needs to determine
whether or not they will go ahead with
these arrest warrants so it isn't final
uh whether or not that has a boost is
difficult to say um it may have a boost
somewhat but probably by by members of
society that already agreed with
Benjamin Netanyahu or the already
support Benjamin Netanyahu it may in
fact support the protest movement who
are anti Benjamin Netanyahu and anti the
way that he's been conducting this war
um they're against the way that he's
been handling the hostage negotiations
and are critical of the government for
not doing enough and it may well bolster
that section of society uh whether it
has a bolstering of Benjamin netan who
is difficult to say but I don't think
that's particularly
likely okay thanks for that Rebecca
rebeccca RS in Jerusalem for